---
tags: []
---
   
# Random Thoughts   
   
## Effort cost and choice   
   
I think the question of "why is effort costly" raises some particular challenges around   
inferring effort costs from choice that are absent when asking "what factors influence   
effort-based decision making?" That's because, in the latter, you're interested in choice   
per se, and so the dv choice is directly indexing that process. This is not so when the   
subject of inquiry is the cost function, as choice leaves you a step removed from the cost   
signal itself.   
   
We can strictly define effort cost as the sense of aversion that arises during an episode   
when effort intensity is engaged. What's the relationship between aversion and choice?   
Obviously, if one were to hold level of aversion constant, there are countless factors   
that would lead one to choose to (i) not react to the aversion and maintain that level of   
effort intensity (ie, no apparent change in behavior), (ii) react to the aversion by   
decreasing effort intensity, (iii) or even react to the aversion by increasing effort   
intensity (although this possibility seems unlikely). Even if perfectly controlling for   
all motivational factors, there could be different levels of 'tolerance' for aversion   
(almost like saying how averse am I to aversion).   
   
What's more, the choice process (I think) in theory necessitates a context switch away   
from engaging task-oriented effort intensity, reflecting the distinction many researchers   
make between task selection and task performance. Let's assume that, consistent with   
theories of cognitive control, task-oriented effort intensity always demands one's   
conscious attention (ie, it can't occur in the periphery or background of attention). I'd   
posit this is also true of the task selection process---it always demands conscious   
attention. In theory, task selection and task performance demand overlapping resources   
that must be adjudicated between with control, implying they can't be performed   
simultaneously and that there are costs involved in switching between the two.   
   
I'm totally open to the idea that a sense of aversion associated with effort intensity   
*can* build up in the background of experience (ie, in the subconscious, not requiring the   
focus of attention). In a perfect world, we'd have some way of measuring this level of   
aversion *during* effort intensity exertion (ie, when the mind is consciously focused on   
task-oriented processing). But trying to measure costs through choice necessitates this   
context switch away from task-oriented processing, meaning that choice is a behavioral signal that's   
pretty far removed from the theoretical construct of interest (effort cost or aversion).    
   
I guess this is the trouble you'll inevitably run into when trying to measure a subjective   
state like aversion (and I guess the same applies to the sense of value). This is where   
one could turn to neuro / physiological measures, but without a trustworthy corresponding   
behavioral signal how would we have confidence that these measures are truly tapping into   
the effort cost and not anything having to do with (what seems more likely) the effort   
intensity of controlled processing?   
   
These thoughts all came about when I tried to think about whether it might be useful to   
design a paradigm where the dv involves a continuation decision---like whether or not to   
keep working framed as a gain or loss somehow. It's true that such a context might more   
closely integrate task selection and task performance, but, because you're relying on   
*choice*, there's still this seemingly irreducible context switch between the selection   
and performance processes. My concerns about whether choices in my current paradigm   
reflect more of an effort forecast seem to be more rooted in concerns around choice as a   
behavioral signal rather than the extent of procedurally interleaving choice and   
performance. I thought maybe showing the impact of framing on the cost function at this   
more interleaved level might more strongly undercut the "effort is intrinsically costly"   
narrative... and it still might... but, because of this embedded context switch, even   
perfect findings wouldn't undercut that narrative completely, and the methodological   
complexity that would be introduced by trying to implement a "choose to stop" dv seem not   
worth it.